docs: Consul Dataplane (Agentless) Beta (#14770)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/connect/dataplane/index.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Simplified Service Mesh with Consul Dataplane
description: >-
   Consul Dataplane removes the need to run client or service discovery and service mesh by leveraging orchestrator functions. Learn about Consul Dataplane, how it can lower latency for Consul on Kubernetes, and how it enables Consul support for AWS Fargate and GKE Autopilot.
---

# Simplified Service Mesh with Consul Dataplane

~> **Consul Dataplane is currently in beta:** Functionality associated with Consul Dataplane is subject to change. You should never use the beta release in secure environments or production scenarios. Features in beta may have performance issues, scaling issues, and limited support.

This topic provides an overview of Consul Dataplane, a lightweight process for managing Envoy proxies introduced in Consul v1.14.0. Consul Dataplane removes the need to run client agents on every node in a cluster for service discovery and service mesh. Instead, Consul deploys sidecar proxies that provide lower latency, support additional runtimes, and integrate with cloud infrastructure providers.

Consul Dataplane requires servers running Consul v1.14-beta+.

> ## What is Consul Dataplane?

Reviewer: Yes! (we could remove the VM component of that diagram as that is future looking).

In standard deployments, Consul uses a control plane that contains both *server agents* and *client agents*. Server agents maintain the service catalog and service mesh, including its security and consistency, while client agents manage communications between service instances, their sidecar proxies, and the servers. While this model is optimal for applications deployed on virtual machines or bare metal servers, orchestrators such as Kubernetes already include components called *kubelets* that support health checking and service location functions typically provided by the client agent.

Consul Dataplane manages Envoy proxies and leaves responsibility for other functions to the orchestrator. As a result, it removes the need to run client agents on every pod. In addition, services no longer need to be reregistered to a local client agent after restarting a service instance, as a client agent’s lack of access to persistent data storage in Kubernetes deployments is no longer an issue.

## Benefits

> **Fewer networking requirements**: Without client agents, Consul doesn’t need to ensure bidirectional network connectivity across multiple protocols to enable gossip communication. Instead, it requires a single gRPC connection to the Consul servers, which significantly simplifies requirements for the operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Fewer networking requirements**: Without client agents, Consul does not require bidirectional network connectivity across multiple protocols to enable gossip communication. Instead, it requires a single gRPC connection to the Consul servers, which significantly simplifies requirements for the operator.
```
Limit the use of contractions

**Additional environment and runtime support**: Current Consul on Kubernetes deployments require using `hostPorts` and `DaemonSets` for client agents, which limits Consul’s ability to be deployed in environments where those features are not supported. As a result, Consul Dataplane supports AWS Fargate and GKE Autopilot.

**Easier upgrades**: With Consul Dataplane, updating Consul to a new version no longer requires upgrading client agents. Consul Dataplane also has better compatibility across Consul server versions, so the process to upgrade Consul servers becomes easier.

## Get started

To get started with Consul Dataplane, use the following reference resources:

- For `consul-dataplane` commands and usage examples, including required flags for startup, refer to the [`consul-dataplane` CLI reference](/consul/docs/dataplane/consul-dataplane).
- For Helm chart information, refer to the [Helm Chart reference](/consul/docs/k8s/helm).

> - For Envoy, Consul, and Consul Dataplane version compatibility, refer to the [Envoy compatibility matrix](/docs/connect/procies/envoy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For Envoy, Consul, and Consul Dataplane version compatibility, refer to the [Envoy compatibility matrix](/docs/connect/proxies/envoy).
```
